---
layout: post
title: "Production Note: Be Still"
date: 2020-03-17 11:59:59 -0800
image: 
  path: /images/2020/03/17/be-still-banner.jpg
  thumbnail: /images/2020/03/17/be-still-banner.jpg
categories: blog
tags:
  - production
  - tabi-mix
excerpt: "In light of the buzz and noise of recent events, the tried and true good ol’ Amaso Trio spent a morning revisiting their Holy Grail—Soma Trio’s “I Love You.” But in a slew of unfortunate events, t’was only this recording, “Be Still,” that remained. In this note, I use our weekend worship collaboration as a platform as an excuse to let my tangential thoughts loose."
---

<figure class="align-center" style="margin:0px;padding:0px;overflow:hidden">
    <div style="text-align: center;">
        <iframe
            width="560"
            height="315"
            src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/helFh7nIUQM"
            frameborder="0">
        </iframe>
    </div>
    <figcaption><i>Soma Trio - Be Still (TaBi-MiX Cover)</i></figcaption>
</figure>

<hr>

This recording of Soma Trio's "Be Still" was kiiinda on the whim.  The COVID-19 thing has been stirring up quite the storm, and one aspect of daily living affected was that in-person Sunday church services at my church moved online.  **So, in efforts to respect the sanctity of a Sunday morning, while still adhering to the spirit of the church service migration, I wanted to spend an hour in the morning to play through the Soma Trio "I Love You" piano trio book with the good ol' tried and true Amaso Trio.**  I figured it was my best way to walk the middle line between the various sentiments that I have been hearing about.  I also figured that if we're going to do a play through, then we might as well record the whole session for documentation purposes, and who knows, maybe someone out there would be encouraged by it.

But I was a darn fool, and didn't know how my camera worked.  So unfortunately we didn't get a video for that.  In efforts to find a saving grace though, we decided to just sightread through this piece, "Be Still," one more time so that we could have some sort of documentation, and because we thought the piece was truly fitting for the times that we are in.

# The Modus Operandi

If y’all know me, then y’all would know I tend not to make decisions haphazardly.  So of course, selecting this piece didn’t come without any consideration.  This time though, as brain dead as it sounds, I chose “Be Still” because that’s what I felt was most needed.  With the whole COVID-19 shenanigans happening, y’all just gotta be still.  Stay at home, work from home, don’t go to that social, don’t move around.  In fact, don’t even breathe, just stay still and keel over once you’re out of oxygen.

Alright, bad and inappropriate jokes aside, “be still” is actually phrase that I really like.  It’s a phrase that commands, and in a lot of things, commands are put down to control.  I think a lot of times, I let my heart go nuts, and in the past, I didn’t really know what to do with that.  **Learning to use the mind to command the heart and soul to “be still” is something that always empowers me, and consequently reminds me that with strong and positive commands, I can guide my naturally pessimistic heart to a better place.**

In this context, “be still” is a command to me to still the heart and soul.  Pandemics are definitely no joke, but the amount of buzz and noise that floats around on the Internet, on the TV, at work, in the social groups breeds panic, frustration, argument, exaggeration, amongst all other things.  There are times where I prefer to still the heart and soul and take the information in as it is, and nothing more.  **Commanding the heart and soul to calm down and be at peace is no easy task, and the thoughts and actions required for that is different for everyone.**  But at least for me, the command to “be still” is something that I needed to tell myself in light of recent events, and so that is why we chose to highlight this one for a recording this week.

# Like Three Peas in a Pod

Alright, this is a music blog, so let’s rope it back in.  I called this a sightread, but I guess it technically is not a sightread, as this is not the first time that we played through this piece by Soma Trio.  We actually [played and recorded "Be Still" 9 years ago](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8IoN_XmY8g).  It was the first time that the three of us, despite growing up together and playing together, recorded a piece together as a trio.  A lot has changed since then, and while we still play music together, it's slightly encouraging to see that our collective voice has changed since then.  Matthew's lead lines now hold a commanding edge to it, Alvin's tone has developed a sense of confidence, and my intonation...still sucks.  Lol.

Half jokes/truths aside, I think probably **the most striking difference that I hear is that in the 2011 version of the recording, we played in a manner to not screw up, while in the 2020 version, we played primarily for a statement.**  It is definitely reflective of what that I have been preachin' for the past couple years, that I prioritize intent over accuracy (though having both would be great).  Our dynamic range from pianissimo to fortissimo is wider, the conversations in the piece are more genuine (Exhibit A - Synchronized Note Starts and Ends, Volume and Intensity Variation Depending on Role in the Conversation:  [old](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8IoN_XmY8g&t=100s) vs. [new](https://youtu.be/helFh7nIUQM?t=131)), and it seems that we are more unified in the message that we want to deliver (Exhibit B - Modulating Rhythm and Phrasing Emphasis: [old](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8IoN_XmY8g&t=146s) vs. [new](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=helFh7nIUQM&t=185s)).

Simply put, I think our experiences that we shared in passion, in struggle, in fun, in boredom, and in maxing out the city trial timer together in Kirby Air Ride every weekend has contributed positively in our cohesion.  I was already a little proud back in the good ol' days when aunties would be like "waow you guys are so cohesive!", but maybe a little more so now, as I think our cohesion has stepped up a notch.  **When it comes to collaboration, I think cohesion is the most important aspect to focus on.**  I think that a group of people all saying the same thing speaks volumes more than a group of people all passionately trying to say different things.

# Chemistry vs. Compromise

Fortunately for us, the three of us have very complimenting (and conflicting) personalities that let us quickly settle on a statement to drive home in our music, so the process is always very smooth.  It usually goes as follows:  I demand things, and everyone follows.  Nice and simple.

Again, half truths/jokes aside, getting a cohesive voice in collaboration is a give and take.  **In groups with less natural chemistry, it means giving up something you may value in order to gain something more.**  Example:  I am a romantic (hehe).  I like the ebb and flow of rhythm, the glissandos and slides of key notes, and passionate phrasing that calls your heart to cry out.  But as equally as I love the flexibility, there are musicians who equally love staying by the books.  Working with them requires a compromise, or sometimes even a sacrifice.  Otherwise, you will just have a bunch of musicians blaring away with no regard to potentially accelerating the development of tinnitus.  A whole lot of something, but a whole lot of nothing.

# Concluding Remarks

And so, this long winded note that says a whole lot of something but a whole lot of nothing can just boil down to this, I guess.  **Collaboration requires cohesion, and cohesion prefers chemistry.  When there is no chemistry, there ought to be compromise.  With no compromise, you get a bunch of c-noise.**  Clamor?  Crap?  You can use whatever c-word you want, up to you, I don't mind.  Or shall I say…c-are? Ok I’ll stop.

This note is a little different from usual, mainly because it's my first public note that doesn't talk about something that I arranged.  It dances less around things in music, and more around the things that motivate my music.  In this note's case, I had the urge to play through some old Jesus music to respect the Jesus time of the week, given the times that we are in.  The recording was a byproduct of that.

But even byproducts have their uses, and just taking our hastily recorded take on "Be Still" and comparing it to what we had 9 years ago, and the things that we've worked with recently, I feel like there was some nice takeaways from the comparison.  We got a nice cohesive voice going on, some rich dialogue and phrasing, and a group balance that encourages each other to sing to their hearts content.  Honestly, rambo note aside, if I really had to point something negative out, then there’s only one thing that I didn’t really like in our recording…

Alvin, why you gotta [hit your stand](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=helFh7nIUQM&t=277s) during the climactic silence man.  Way to kill the mood (half joke/truth, btw).